We publish booklets and we give them information
in closing and we visit with all the landscape
architects and architectural, I mean, landscape
firms that operate in the woodlands to try to get
them to think about this natural environment and
saving trees. So that's an ongoing process. Yeah,
every year we have something called Arbor Day and
we've given away, how many of them? 330,000
seedlings and small trees. And people stand in
line to get those trees and they take them home and
plant them in the yard. And we just got together in
the Wildflower Festival. Wildflowers are deeply
a part of the image of the woodlands. Lady Bird
Johnson has been here for several seminars. She's
deeply involved in wildflowers. And Texas
wildflowers are something we plant and cultivate
every year and have a very well-defined program to
propagate those. At what point following 86 did
you feel like you were rounding the hump, let's
say, of the financial? You may not have felt that
way yet. I guess we're still working on it.
Statistically, the third quarter of 1987 is when
the Houston economy started rebounding. I think
we gained 12,000 jobs in Houston in the third
quarter of 1987 after having lost 200,000. That
was the first time you could see it coming back. In
1988, I think we gained maybe 30,000 jobs at about
that level, maybe 40,000 jobs in 1989.
According to a study done by Barton Smith at the
University of Houston, you probably know,
Houston is now about 60% energy dependent, where
it was 80% energy dependent. And the strengths
are, you know, the port of Houston, it's number one
in the nation in terms of export tonnage. And most
of that is not petroleum related. It's grain and
foodstuffs and things like that. The NASA Space
Center, of course, has come back strongly during
the downturn. During that downturn, we were
blessed, too, with the largest highway
construction program ever undertaken in this
region. More than a billion dollars a year was
spent on highway construction in the Houston
region, which exceeded any other state in the
nation except California for a five-year period
of time. And, of course, the tremendous growth and
expansion of the Texas Medical Center The $5
billion expansion program underway out there and
it's still ongoing. It really helped the Houston
economy. Compact Computer came into being. It
didn't exist in 1982. And that's one of the major
companies in this country. And it's located 20
miles away. The biotechnology industry and
startup companies that have come out of that. Dr.
Dominic Lamb, you'll enjoy that interview. He's a
very interesting, intelligent, bright,
energetic person. You'll get a lot from Dr. Lamb.
There was another matter I was going to mention.
Maybe I'll come back to him in a moment. By 88,
things are... Yeah, by 88, you can see things
moving in the right direction. 89 was a good year.
This year, we'll have a record year in home sales.
So far, we've sold almost $120 billion worth of
home sales, $120 million worth of home sales. $120
million worth of new homes this year. Oh, no, the
Barton Smith study. We had him conduct a study to
determine what is the impact of the Woodlands on
the economy of Montgomery County. In the early
days, the Woodlands was not well accepted by
Montgomery County. There's a great deal of
suspicion and doubt and uncertainty. Even
hostility from the commissioners. Hostility.
And there is still some of that, but it's beginning
to wane, and obviously it's not so bad. But the
interesting thing about that study is that now the
Woodlands... It constitutes 17% of the tax base in
the county. It is the biggest single taxpaying
entity in the county today. At one time, the Conroe
oil field was the dominant economic generator for
taxes in the county. And now the Woodlands
exceeds, and when I say the Woodlands, I mean all
the homes, all the development. Collectively.
The Woodlands pays more taxes than the Conroe oil
field pays to support schools and the county
government. We also now constitute about 16% of
the voting population in the county.
The community is predominantly Republican,
predominantly conservative, and it's changed
the shape of politics within the county. When I
moved here 20 something years ago in Montgomery
County, you could not find anyone who would
profess to be a Republican. except Dr. Wally
Wilkerson, who was part of the Republican Party.
Today, you can't find anybody who agrees that
they're a Democrat. Even the local officeholders
who originally were elected as Democrats have now
changed to the Republican Party for fear of being
defeated. The Woodlands has done, I think, a
number of positive things for the county. It's
helped create economic growth. It's helped
create jobs. It's provided, I think, the numbers,
25% of the... retail sales are generated by people
who live in the Woodlands. That's not 25% of retail
sales occurring in the Woodlands, but the
population of the Woodlands generates 25% of the
retail sales. Has this study been published? I'll
give you a copy of it. I think we'd like that. Jack,
could you see it? It's interesting reading. I got
Dr. Smith to do it, so it would be objective. We
could do it, but that would not be held to be fairly
objective. Yeah, credibility would be
questioned. But this will give you some good
background information from a third-party
source. It's got a good executive summary, and
then he kind of gets involved in the science of
evaluating demographics and economic
evaluation.
the executive summary makes more exciting
reading than the methodology.
So, what do you think now, so we're in, you and you
now, are in a position of potential expansion,
let's say, on the conditions of potentially good,
but... Well, you know, we've got the same over in
the Gulf, and we've got oil prices that... It went
down $5 a barrel yesterday, and I don't know what
they've done today. And there is a devastating
financial condition for financing real estate
nationally. And while the market is good in the
Houston region, financial institutions don't
look favorably upon real estate financing. So I
think it's going to have some detrimental effect
on Houston, even though we're doing much better
than the nation as a whole. We still look to the
money-centered banks for a lot of financing. And I
don't think that it's going to be as generous as we
would like for it
to be. But so far, we've spent $2 billion in the
woods total. $2 billion has been invested by all
parties in the woods. A billion dollars of that is
in residential homes owned by third parties. The
rest of it's in schools and churches office
buildings and research facilities and land
development and those kinds
of things. Upon completion, total investment in
the woodlands will be about $12 billion by all
parties. And the population will be somewhere
around 150,000 people. And we anticipate having
about 80,000 jobs, permanent jobs. Someone
asked, when are you going to finish developing the
woodlands? and the very clear answer to that we
never will because no city is ever complete i don't
think he's ever driven through any city in this
country where you could say they have finished i
mean there will always be redevelopment the
reconstruction of buildings replacement of
housing but essentially most of the development
will will have occurred by the year 2027
We have a very definite plan year by year, unit by
unit. You asked about the strategy for developing
it. We have an economic model that we update
annually that looks forward and takes into
account changes since we last did it. Is that
in-house? Is that done in-house? We do it with some
outside consulting help, but it's an in-house
document that we produce our own. planning
purposes. And we don't publish that. Do you see
this kind of expansion of population growth and so
forth as being a threat or a great difficulty in
continuing to manage the environment and the
quality of life type situation? Or do you feel
quite comfortable that can be accommodated? I
think it can be accomplished, but it's becoming
more complicated. You know, I think the 1990s is
going to be the decade of the environment. We see
things like concerned about hazardous waste
endangered species the wetlands the Clean Air Act
all of those things are going to come to bear and
frankly I don't think in the future you're going to
see very many large-scale communities like the
woodlands undertaken in the future for those very
reasons there's so much uncertainty over the life
span of developing a community like this that You
deal with a lot of uncertainties, a lot of risk
involved. You have so much front-end investment
that you have to recoup out of the assumption of
later development. Q And, Shane, are there any
more government initiatives in that direction
that you would like to see? THE PRESIDENT. No, I
don't think you probably will. I think the
government involvement should be one of
providing incentives and not providing
roadblocks. Actually, some people look at the
Woodlands as a government-sponsored community.
We borrowed $50 million to start the development
of the Woodlands, but we're paying that back. That
was a loan. That was not a gift from heaven. It was a
little lower interest rate, but when you add to it
all the administrative costs of monitoring that
for the government and reporting and the hassle
you go through, I'm not sure it was a A good bargain.
George Mitchell will tell you it was a tremendous
bargain. But I lived over here working on those
reports that had to go in. And there was a cost
attached to that. But I think the environment is
going to be a great challenge in the future. We, I
think, tried to address it very well. And I think
we've done a pretty good job of it. But I think there
are going to be more and more rules and regulations
promulgated without a clear understanding of the
impact It's going to cause uncertainties and
delays. And the delays are the money. And when you
get one of these started, you really need to move
along with it. You can't have periods of time when
you do nothing. What projects are you really
devoting most of your time to right now? Or is there
any kind of, any kind of affinity like that in what
I'm doing? I'm pretty well involved in all the
projects that are going on. And it's hard in a
community like this to separate it into a series of
projects. They're all interrelated. Right now,
this week, we have the formal opening of a new
18-hole golf course designed by Arnold Palmer.
And we are expanding the country club in a large
amount. What is that opening? It's on the 30th.
You're invited. Thank you, sir. Come at 11
o'clock. But right now, after being here 15 years,
a number of our facilities are 15 years old, and we
have had an ongoing refurbishing program, but
right now it's a little more intensive than it has
been in the past. We've renovated the conference
center, updated the guest rooms, enlarging the
country club, separating the conference center
from the country club, so there are two separate
entities over there. We're enlarging the golf
facilities because the membership has grown
tremendously. We're engaged in, continually
engaged in this economic development program and
encouraging businesses to locate here. And the
main thrust of Madigan would be, right now, is in
the medical area, in the, say, the youth, I'm using
the umbrella of the Youth and Advanced Research
area. And also well-established companies
looking for a home. For example, we have the
Products Testing Laboratory for Penzol here, a
well-established company. Betts Process
Chemical has a major operation here. Up in the
Trade Center, you may or may not have seen it, it's a
rail-serve trade center and major distribution
centers there owned by Michelin Tire, Kraft Food,
Eckerd Drug, The distribution outlet for
McDonald's, as well as Burger King are there. Are
you continuing that expansion? Yeah. As a matter
of fact, most of our buildings are completely full
there. We have an ongoing program to enhance and
improve the mobility of the region through the
encouragement of improving highways. We've
created here in the Woodlands, and I think this is
kind of unique, we've created a commuter van
system. and also commuter bus parking ride
system. We're outside the service area of the
Houston Metro, so they could not bring buses into
the woodlands. So we worked through the county and
got a federal grant, and we built a parking ride
lot, and we financed the buses. It's now being
operated by Brazos Transit Authority, which is
located in Bryan, I believe. They do a good job.
Yeah, they do a good job here, too. So we've been
able to take, you know, four, five, six hundred
cars off the highway by creating alternative
systems for transportation. Is there no internal
transportation? Would you anticipate ever
having to do something like that? Well, we're
setting aside right-of-ways and the provision
for that to occur. There's no defined plan to make
it happen currently. Most of those that have been
attempted have failed. Without some heavy
subsidy, it's hard to... Even up to Brian, I don't
know. I was wondering about rail service. Do you
need to keep it there? Do you think you had a
monorail or anything like that in the
Houston-Dallas connection? Well, that's always
a possibility, and part of the dream that we have is
there's a plan for this high-speed rail from
Dallas to Houston and to San Antonio. And there are
a couple of alternate routes for that. Both are to
the west of the Woodlands. They would not come
through the Woodlands. So I don't think we'd be
exposed to that opportunity, but we do have a rail
system here at the front door. And there's great
debate in the city of Houston, as you know right
now, about heavy rail, whether or not to have it,
and if so, where, and who pays for it. If, as you
commented, the 90s become the decade of the
environmental movement, highway building, if
it's pursued logically, would diminish, I would
think. Go ahead. Alternative, as you suggested,
alternative transport modes would have to then
Yeah, I think you're going to see those pressures.
I think you're exactly right. With respect to the
specific question about rail, I don't think
that's in the immediate 10-year horizon just
because of cost and time to build it, who owns it and
how it operates. There are a lot of questions that
need to be answered about rail before it's
implemented anywhere in the Houston region, I
think. Great debate about that thing. What about
recreation as an economic investment? That's a
good question. That's a good question. Back when I
got started in the real estate development
business, developers typically built golf
courses to help sell land and then hope they didn't
lose too much money and usually gave it away to The
members, if they would take it or sell it to someone
for a small number of dollars, Club Corporation of
America became wealthy by taking over clubs that
developers didn't want, didn't know how to run, or
that members couldn't operate. Today, that's
changed. Golf is a business, and it's a profitable
business. And we have, we just finished a study
looking at golf meets in the woodlands. Right now,
we have four 18-hole golf courses. One of them is a
tournament players course, which is in fact a
day-to-day course. You don't have to be a member to
play. We have one course for the conferees who
visit the conference center for recreational
purposes. And we have two 18-hole courses set
aside for country club membership. And we had the
firm by the name of Real Estate Research
Associates of California do a comprehensive
study course looking at the total golf needs and
demands throughout the life of the Woodlands. And
in total we need 10 golf courses in the Woodlands,
10 18-hole golf courses. But we need six more than
we have today. And that would be a combination of a
second tournament players course, which we have
the right to build, a 36-hole daily feed course, a
public course, for those who cannot afford or
choose not to belong to a country club. And then a
more exclusive country club than the one we have
today, a higher-end club, maybe an equity club
where the members would own that. We're combining
that now with our land planning for the remaining
portions of the woodlands to make sure we set aside
enough land in the right place to accommodate
those golfing needs. Is the skiing operation
under your surveillance also? Is it all the ski
lines or skiing lifts in Colorado? Yeah. We've got
all the real estate falls under- Within the
corporation? Yeah. We've got two parcels of land
in Colorado, one between Aspen and Snowmass, and
one at Simbo Springs. The regulatory environment
up there is a morass. You have the Forest Service.
Yeah, dealing with everybody. Forest Service is
the one who grants permits, but you deal with
everyone who chooses to deal with you. But in the
area between Aspen and Snowmass, we have
developed about 800 acres of land and have sold
lots to individuals who have built homes. And
that's in the very beautiful Owl Creek Valley that
extends the entire distance from the town of Aspen
to the town of Snowman. And in Steamboat Springs,
we have 3,000 acres of land that we own jointly with
a third party. And there we're actively trying to
get a permit to build a ski mountain. And that one
will take on a different character from what we
have in Aspen. has been very low density. The only
thing that, you know, recreation can tie in nicely
with your quality of life and with the impact on
your medical care, atmosphere, and even with the
environment. The jogging path. Yeah. You asked
about other recreational things here in the
Woodlands, and you mentioned jogging paths.
That's probably the single most popular
recreational amenity we have. We have 53 miles of
pathway. And it's off the $20 a foot to build that.
Is that your cost? $10,000 a month. $10,000 a
month. Forget the number. $5 to $10 million
invested in this pathway. I mean, that's
tremendous investment in a recreational
facility. But it's used by everybody. Kids on
bicycles, people out for exercise. people both
jogging and riding bicycles and actually
commuting in some cases from home to school and
from home to shopping. We've got some of the
retirement communities located close to the
shopping center and you see people in wheelchairs
walking down and moving down the pathway to go to
the grocery store. So it's kind of a nice feel to it.
We have a swimming athletic center which is
olympic quality in terms of its facility as a
matter of fact olympic tryouts are held there and
we're in the process of enlarging and upgrading
that currently i think in uh summary i really take
up how much time you wanted to give us but um i still
got a couple questions okay you go ahead well one of
the things which you started and we got distracted
away from you mentioned some of the things that in
the future
not that they worry, but the things you're
planning to do. The other side of that coin is, what
are the future incentives or the initiatives that
you perceive? Are there future initiatives? Is it
going to be business as usual, or are there other
initiatives that the Woodlands is going to
develop in the next two, three decades? Well,
yeah, there are very specific things that we need
to develop in the next several decades. One is Town
Center. Town Center is well defined on paper,
still defined if you try to find it. But it will
include about 17 million square feet of office
space, which is equivalent to the downtown of
probably Cincinnati, if you measure it in square
footage. But it will include a regional shopping
mall, and it will be the urbanized center for
Northeastern. Not only the urbanized center for
Woodlands, but we look at that as a focal point for
business in Northeastern. The termination of the
Hardy Toll Road is on I-45. It's the intersection
of some major east-west roadways under design and
partially under construction, and it will be the
center of population for more than a million
people. So we look at that as a big item on our agenda
for the next 10 to 15 years. We look at the research
forest only at its beginning stages right now, and
we would hope we would have 15,000, 20,000 jobs in
the research forest over the next 20 years, and in
fact do things like have been done in the research
triangle of North Carolina or around the Stanford
and the Silicon Valley or Route 128 in Boston. So
that's a long-term goal and objective. We work on
it every day, and we try not to lose sense of
direction of where we're trying to get to and be
discouraged if we haven't gotten there as quickly
as we'd like. Those are two very big elements.
Beyond that, the continuation of a quality
residential program on the remaining lands in the
woodlands that continues to provide housing
opportunities for the secretary and the clerk and
the grocery store as well as the chairman of the
board. All done in a tasteful way. Neighborhoods
that are close together. So you get this social
intermixing of it. school level anyway other
schools where you don't have an elitist side of
town and a poor side of town so that's an objective
that we had from the beginning and we still pursue
we have a couple of major lakes we'd like to build in
the woodlands for recreational purposes and
that's going to take some regulatory approval
governmental health and things like that but
that's part of the mission that we look at it as
being important to us. Let me answer a couple of
specific questions. My brother's a city manager
in Las Vegas. He's been doing that for more than a
dozen years. I called him several months ago, or
actually a better part of a year ago, when we first
started kicking around with the tickets. Well,
over the years I've talked to them, I'm completely
at sea when it comes to the niceties or the
crudities, however you want to look at it, of
running a community. Both definitions are right.
You mentioned that the Woodlands is
non-incorporated. That's right. Will it be?
Well, let me give you the legal side and then maybe
the practical side, a little background. Right
now we have a community association. We were
formed when the Woodlands was created. and is
supported financially by assessments applied
against all the properties that have been
developed in the area. And it has about a $6 million
budget now. And it provides all the municipal
services that the city would provide, including
the fire department, the collection of garbage,
the street escape maintenance, neighborhood
watch programs, emergency medical services,
street lights, mowing grass, maintaining the
parks and pathways. does everything the city
would do. And the outlook is for that mechanism to
continue until one of two things happens. The
woodlands become separately incorporated in the
city, or it's incorporated into the corporate
boundaries of the city of Houston. And under
current state law, the woodlands is in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of
Houston. the city of houston has the right and
authority to annex the woodlands anytime it would
like to do that as a practical matter i don't think
they will for another year for a couple reasons one
we're not contiguous to the existing boundaries
of the city of houston and they would have to step
over a lot of the land that would not be in their
corporate boundaries and two they're not going to
annex the woodlands as long as there's a
significant debt existing in the municipal
utility districts that have been created to
provide utilities. The way to let that is to pay
down. I would think that over the next 20 years,
unless state law changes, that Woodlands will
become part of the community. Are you, is that
part, is that an assumption built into your
strategic plan? Yes. Okay. I'll go on to say, too,
that if you took a vote in the Woodlands today,
there'd probably be 90% of the people who would
choose not to be in the city of Houston and maybe 10%
who would. So it would not necessarily be a popular
decision. But when you think about it on a regional
basis and you step aside from the selfish, what's
best for me, question, Cities up in the
northeastern part of the country and other parts
of the country have been choked, small
incorporated cities surrounding them, people,
productive people moving out of the inner city,
living and paying taxes in these small
incorporated areas. And the central city has no
tax base or declining tax base to provide social
services, the airport, the library, the museum,
the streets that lead to the jobs where people
work. And philosophically, George Mitchell felt
that the city of Houston needed to have the ability
to continue to annex land and grow as it could
provide services for those areas. So by contract,
the Woodlands is included in ETJ. It was not
geographically situated to be included in ETJ,
but by contract, it is now included in ETJ, the city
of Houston. Isn't that, I mean, a lot of what you
said, you know, where you could go, well, one, does
the community in fact know that? Yes. They do know
that. Isn't that then a potential source of some
grievous conflict in the future? Yes. Which
means, I mean, what's going to happen? Well,
right now the approach, and I think the realistic
response is that nothing is going to happen for a
period of time the city of houston is not going to
annex the woodland for a period of time you know
likelihood if it's a sleeping dog that's going to
wake up well it slept in a place called clear lake
city until the residents there challenged the
system and under state law an area can if it wants to
separately incorporate first has to ask the city
in whose ETJ it resides to annex them. And if the
city refuses to do that, then they can
unincorporate. The Clear Lake City asked the
question, and they were annexed into the city of
Houston. And that was not a pleasant set of
circumstances. It existed for a number of years.
As you look around Houston, Every major
large-scale community is an ETJ in the city of
Houston. It's not unique to the woodlands. No, I
know that. So wherever you locate around the city
of Houston, you're faced with the same issue. So
it's not a unique woodlands question. It's a
regional issue. But the distinction is, I mean,
forgive me, but the distinction is those
communities,
this is a corporation running a community. You
know, that isn't happening. Kingwood is, too. Oh,
is it? Mm-hmm. Fair Lake City is, too. Oh, because
what I would... You know, at least it would be a
nagging headache in the back of my skull that at
some point, instead of animosity being turned
toward the city of Houston or some other place,
that I'm going to catch it in my lap, you know. Well,
under the community association that we have
here, it's a representative form of government.
The residents elect... representatives to serve
on their behalf on the board of directors that
addresses all of the services and charges for
those services, the scope of delivering those
services. And in fact, in 1992, the residents will
control that WCA board, the community
association board, and the developer will no
longer control that one. So it's not that the
corporation controls the community. the
residents will control the community. You're in
the middle of that transfer right now. Yeah,
right. That was my second question. We're in the
transition. That takes place in 1992, and we're
trying to go through the discussion of trying to
prepare the community for that happening. And
right now, frankly, there is some confusion. It's
a complicated issue, but most people don't think
about it day to day. It's not something they deal
with. And then when confronted with the notion
that something's going to happen, the natural
reaction is, if it's changing, I need to be
concerned about it. And then they try to learn
quickly what they need to be concerned about. And
we're going through a very lengthy educational
process now to make sure they don't misunderstand
that we're the bad guys. Sure. That was my other
question. As the privatization of city
management... you know, what's your role? How do
you, you know, how will you continue to influence
or affect the quality of life issues, the
infrastructure that you've worked so hard to
establish? Well, we hope we put in place a
framework with respect to those areas already
developed that will last long after the
development is on. That was the, I don't like the
word scheme, that was the concept. to put in place a
form of quasi-government. Residents would run,
control, operate, and take care of their own
needs. Our intent is not to be here forever. It just
probably seems that we will be. We'll be here for a
long time. But in 1992, when this first community
association control transfers to the residents,
A second community association will be formed to
carry out the development mission on lands not yet
developed. So we will, in essence, control. We'll
have the capacity to control the undeveloped
lands with respect to lands already developed the
residents will control that. So there's a
transfer of control with respect to what's
already been done. In terms of residential
development, you're about halfway where you've
No. No, we've got 30,000 people live here, 150,000
or whatever percent that is.
But it's an accelerating phase.
If we don't have eight years of economic hardship,
maybe we'll move along faster. We're 16 years old
and we've been in the doldrums eight of those 16
years. So I think our progress has been, I think,
surprisingly good, considering the time that
we've been here. Well, I think you can see, whereas
the rest of the country has been in relaxation now,
you've still been pretty active. Let me ask one
last question, and then I'll shut up. And you may
find this impertinent, but it's something that I
wondered about as I talked with Mr. Richmond, Mr.
Brown, and now you. What would happen? to the
Woodlands if George Mitchell died tomorrow?
Well, the Woodlands Corporation is a wholly owned
subsidiary of a public corporation. George, in
fact, owns 62% of the stock of that corporation,
but it is publicly held and will have an ongoing
life should something unfortunate happen to Mr.
Mitchell. I'm not privy to how his estate would be
managed. I would
not expect any great changes over the short term.
Over a longer period of time, I don't guess I would
be capable of addressing that. There's enough
framework in the Woodlands, just talking about
the Woodlands itself and the community of the
Woodlands. There's enough framework here
already in place and enough initiatives in place,
and it's market vitality has been established to
the point where I think it could have an ongoing
life beyond Mr. Mitchell. You feel that the
strategic plans you've developed and the
machinery of those are going to continue on
regardless? Yeah, there may be some modification
to it, but I've come back to the earlier
statements. What we've tried to do is build fabric
in the community that gives the community an
ongoing life and set it in place. It's an
institution that has a life of its own. And it will
be a viable community. You know, a town of 30,000
people is not a small town. And it's got a lot of
elements in it that are necessary to make it
function, even if it's reading up others. By 92,
basically, the Woodlands Corporation would be
another business located in the Woodlands. Well,
except that they'll still be developing. Well,
we're going to continue to develop. In 1992, you
won't be able to tell any difference visually if
you drive in here. And if you live here, you
probably won't notice any difference either.
Legally, there'll be some changes that take
place. But I think with respect to the development
concept, the quality of what we're doing, the pace
at which we're doing it, the way it's financed,
It's a
unique opportunity,
a unique
place. It's nice to have a sense of pride in what
you're doing. I guess the most satisfying things I
can do is not sit here in the office, but
occasionally on the weekend drive around and see
what's happening. I mean, it's kind of impressive
when you get out and look at all the things that have
happened. And we get caught up in the fires like
anyone else. There's a crisis today or a crisis
tomorrow, and we address that, and we like to think
we always have a long-range vision, but in truth
and in fact, you have daily things that you need to
do. And it's nice to back away occasionally to
reflect on what has happened and what can't
happen. And we've got a staff of people who have
been here a long time. That was my next question.
How do you work? Do you have staff meetings
regularly? Yeah, we have staff meetings and
planning meetings and meetings on special
issues. But we've got most of our employees have
been with us 10, 15 years and been working together
as a team for that period of time. We don't have a lot
of turnover. You don't have to have quite as many
meetings when people have been around that long.
Everyone knows what they need to do and what's
expected of them. But in managing this process, we
have a staff meeting once a week where our key
managers get together and talk about the issues
and try to stay away from numbers and details and
look at the big picture. Then we have specific
planning meetings in the residential
communities and also in the commercial and retail
areas. We have staff groups, like Jack provides
advertising and VR services to the operating
units. Each operating unit doesn't have an
advertising and VR person. We have a centralized
engineering and construction group. We have a
centralized land planning group. You can have
Dick Brown, apparently. We have centralized
legal, accounting, and other services. And then
we have essentially three operating groups. We
have a residential group, we have a commercial
industrial group, and we have a hospitality
group. Those are the three components of the
Woodlands community. And then we have another
group that we call Mitchell Southwest that takes
care of all the properties not in the Woodlands.
40,000 acres of timberland between here and
College Station. And we have resort properties on
Galliston and on Lake Travis, Lake Livingston.
And that's taken care of by a separate group.
That's a good summary. I haven't heard that
before. The stuff that Mr. Mitchell does, the
restoration stuff on Galliston, that's not done
by you, then? No, we provide the technical
services. That's all his money, all his
initiative. We have a couple architects that work
in our planning group that help him select
architects, especially trained in renovation
work. We oversee some of the construction for him,
and we are reimbursed on a time basis for the work we
provide for him. So that's basically like a
contractual contract. Yeah, right. But you are
doing the, not fire, what's the point? Point
Venture? No, that'll be all. Pirates. Pirate
speech and code? Yeah. Yeah, that's not right. And
there's new activity there, right? Yeah, right.
Right. Several kinds of new activity. One, we're
developing part of it, and we're in the courthouse
on part of it. We've been trying to get approval to
develop one little parcel down there for 16 years
now. And it's caught up in emotion and environment
and local politics. We sure appreciate your time.
Well, thanks for coming by. I look forward to
seeing what work product you produce here. We
will, too. What is your time frame for? Really
about six months.